They stood on that particular issue and that they were not changing their minds on it.
I mean, that it was preconceived.
Also, there was an issue of the receptiveness of the community to international persons was a very burning issue at that time.
And I remember having a sense that people sort of had built in or entrenched positions about what the dean of faculties ought to do
on that issue.
On international?
Yes, on internationals.
Clarify that.
Graduate students and faculty sometimes do not find a very warm reception here.
And there had been incidents that had been in the newspaper and I think people were carrying that concern into the interview process.
So I'd been through that interview process once.
Going through it the second time, I thought there was much less of the preconceived position.
And also, obviously, I'd been at A&M long enough to know it a little better.
And I think people had rightly been concerned that first time around that I just didn't know this community well enough.
You met with faculty representatives, the provost, distinguished professors.
What about the sitting deans?
Were they part of the... Had a session with the sitting deans, certainly, and most of them were actually there.
Maybe a couple had associate deans there to represent them.
Remember any particular concerns they had?
No, I wish I could.
Did you get the impression from them at that point that they considered the dean of faculties as one of their peers?
Yes, I did in the interview process, although, of course, I knew that in a sense that wasn't true.
I mean, there were no surprises.
The dean of faculties has the title dean, but it's dean without a college, you know.
And that was already very clear to me, and it just wasn't an issue.
They knew it, and I knew it, and we didn't have to explore that issue.
They knew that I'd been associate dean for many years and that I had some grasp of how the dean of faculties worked with deans.
How did you learn that you were the selectee?
Well, I guess it was the chair of a committee
No, it was the chair of the committee who had notified me that I was selected for the interview.
It was the provost himself.
I'm finally going to get this straight.
Did he call you?
I believe I had a call from his office and was asked to come back over to see him for a return trip.
So I believe it was Norma Millsap who called me, actually.
And we had a return visit.
He was working out the terms of what he was willing to offer me.
And it was one of the early general meetings in the Vision 2020
project.
I was had worked on vision 2020 project and I can remember that I went back down in the meeting room and I was listening to presentations and he came in a side door and started looking around the room and I slipped out and he had the offer letter ready at that time.
where did you get either by written or by oral method, did you get any directions, guidelines as to what you would be doing as dean of faculties?
We had, of course, discussed my understanding of the job, and I had worked with Bill Perry pretty darn closely since I was associate dean for faculty affairs in a big college.
We had a lot of interaction, and so I had a pretty good grip on what the job was.
But when I first started, I did meet with the provost every month for a good couple of hour session to go over what I was doing, what was up, what he wanted me to do.
And for a while, I also had regular meetings with Bill Perry to get his immediate past perception and his suggestions.
So there was a smooth transition.
Yeah.
Were there any fires to be put out?
I think we had fires from day one.
I can't remember specific.
I guess the hottest fire when I came in
was the resentment that still existed about two promotion and tenure cases from a year earlier, where the provost had decided against the college recommendations.
And those had been made clear to me during the interview process, and there was still very strong resentment of those things.
Why did you accept the position?
I felt I could be a change agent.
I knew that I took great satisfaction in doing faculty affairs.
While I had been in a totally faculty role, I had enjoyed it very much, but I had sometimes felt deprivation of information.
I like to know what's going on.
I had known what was going on as associate dean, and suddenly I didn't anymore.
I essentially couldn't resist.
I was very clear I would never be an administrator again.
And there was no other administrative job anywhere, I believe, that I would have taken except this one.
Alright, did you have any personal goals?
I certainly wanted to see fairness in our dealings with women.
I wanted women to come to perceive this as a more welcoming place than women sometimes do.
Sorry to have to tell you that.
I was very invigorated by Vision 2020, and I was delighted at the thought of being a part of a process
a part of a group of people trying to do something so ambitious.
I don't think I said to myself when I took the job, my A number one goal is diversity at this institution, but it was not long thereafter that as I reflected on what I was doing, I knew that that was the most important thing for me.
All right, trivia.
Do you know, why is it dean of faculties?
Why is it plural instead of singular?
I don't know historically, but I do know the concept, which is that there is a faculty in this college, there is a faculty in that college, and this person, this official, is the dean of all those faculties.
As an editorial note, when I inherited that title, I always wondered why.
And some years later, I happened to be looking at an old Clemson College, it was then, Clemson College catalog.
And I was looking through it, and I noticed that a man who had been a professor of history, Southern history being especially at Clemson, a man named Jack Kenny Williams,
that he had just been appointed at Clemson as dean of faculties.
And later I mentioned it to his wife, because Dr. Williams was dead by the time I learned this, I mentioned it to her and she said, yes, I think that's the way the title got to A&M, that that was the title he had had.
Let's see, the staff you inherited, who was on the staff in the office when you became dean of faculties?
Ann Pittman, of course, had worked for every dean of faculties that A&M had had.
Describe her.
I, by the way, think that you ought to be interviewing her.
Oh, I plan to.
A great sweep of time.
Yes.
And she is a person whose role has grown and matured.
I don't know if in the first days she was more than a secretary, but certainly over the years had grown to be more than a secretary.
And I think perhaps people's preconceptions of what a person like Ann Pittman can do have changed, and rightly so.
She was, in fact, when you became the dean, she was kind of the chief of staff, wasn't she?
Sure.
And clearly, certainly is now.
The main secretary to the dean of faculties had been Janice Crockett.
She went with Bill Perry.
She is up on the ninth floor now.
And so we had to hire a secretary for me immediately.
and I had some misadventure there, but I have a very good person now.
Mildred Seaton was here as a receptionist and had worked in the office for quite some time.
Mildred's now over at the Faculty Senate.
There was a bookkeeper position that
had been open for some time.
I think illness of the previous person, but now I'm not sure.
The office, the work was very badly backed up and stacked up.
Ann made the decision and hired Betsy Moss, like maybe a couple of weeks or so before I came into the job.
We have added one staff position.
Now your official first day was...
was August 1 of 1998.
The provost had asked me to assume it on July 1,
And I said, could I please delay it for a month?
I was struggling to complete a book manuscript of which I'd written only about a fourth or so.
And I wanted to get it as far along as I could before I came in here.
In effect, that meant that I was about a third to a half time dean of faculties for the month of July without the salary, because I was in here a lot.
And the location of the office was then, as it is now, on the sixth floor of Rudder.
I would say that the physical surrounding was the aspect that gave me the most concern and caused me to hesitate before I took it.
I don't like at all the way the office is split between sections, and now we're split in three sections.
If you could be the supreme commander of Texas A&M, where would you have the major academic administrative offices?
I'd put them back in what we used to call the system building, though that's not what it's called now.
The Jack Williams building.
I agree, I agree.
I think that's where we ought to be.
Describe, as you began to get fully involved in the routine of dean of faculties, what was a typical day, week, and season like?
What were the different routines that you found consumed all your time?
Yeah, of course we have a constant stream of hiring that's coming through, mostly in the spring semester, but dribbles throughout the year.
Do you review all faculty?
All faculty appointments.
Whether they're tenure track or not.
That's right.
And what are the key items you look at as you review those materials?
I look for degree.
I mean, there are accreditation standards, after all.
We have to see if we're meeting those.
And sometimes people put through people who don't meet them.
Once in a while, there's reason to make an exception.
And if there is, I make sure it's written down.
So if the Southern Association comes and looks, they'll know why we did it.
So I look for degree.
I look for record.
I try to watch for fairness search.
Sometimes, even though the dean of faculty's sign off is required, people have, in effect, hired somebody and done the paperwork in retrospect.
I mean, yes, through informal deals, and that will probably always be true, but I've tried to
remind people of the fact that we're supposed to do these things decently and in order and get the approvals first before we reach agreements with people.
Which colleges have been, I'm not going to ask the negative, which colleges have been the best in doing it the way it should be done?
The routine, the paperwork, and so forth?
Oh, gee, I hate to brag, but I think liberal arts has been the best.
Another college, which will remain nameless here, a year or so ago was hiring a person with tenure, which requires not only my approval, but the provost's personal approval.
And when I called to say,
Do you by any chance have the letters of recommendation that we'd like to look at?
Because the provost had been saying, you know, we really ought to review these hires with tenure more thoroughly than maybe we have been.
I found out not only had they no letters of recommendation, but the department had said, I hope there's no problem.
He's already been here and bought a house.
We were getting significantly out of order there, yes.
The rhythm of work is very intense at the time of year when most academics are easing off between semesters because that's when the promotion and tenure files come.
And I am always proud to say, and I say it over and over to various groups and individuals, that those files are read.
They are not laid on a postage meter, and if they're heavy enough, they win, and if they're not, they don't.
They are read.
I read them all over the Christmas holidays.
Usually I don't read files on December 25th, but every other day of the break.
I know that the provost reads them all because when we get into those discussions with the deans, he will sometimes ask questions that I don't have down in my elaborate notes.
And in his very brief notes, he has them.
So we are reading those things.
I keep data on them.
I look for evidence that the teaching is being seriously considered.
I know there are faculty who believe that nobody cares about teaching.
I do not perceive it that way from the central procedure.
I think teaching is looked at and carefully.
And we spend a lot of time.
I mean, these are decisions that affect people's whole professional lives.
About, in general, what percentage of your time did you spend on at your desk simply reviewing paperwork?
Oh, I spend most of my day here, probably more than I would if I didn't have email, because I'm a little bit of a slave to email.
When it comes in, I look at it right away.
I've always felt that administrators needed to be getting out
and talking with the people out there.
A college dean more so than the dean of faculties, I must say.
But I did not do a good job of that when I was associate dean, and I don't do a good job of it now.
I'm very much a desk person.
Did you attempt to go to college faculty meetings?
Oh, I go to every college faculty meetings in the fall when we give the teaching awards and make those presentations.
I try to make sure that every year there's a notice sent out that if departments or colleges want me to come for an informal visit, I will do so.
There are places where I have never been invited.
There are places where I've been invited repeatedly.
Who invite you most?
Entomology has been the department that pops immediately to mind, is always wanting me to come every year, and the faculty always have questions, and we have a good conversation.
There are places where I think
People would wonder what I was doing there if I came over and why was I sticking my nose in and such as that.
So I wait to be asked.
Then during the week you meet with the deans, is it still called the APC?
The APC, the Academic Program Council, meets once a month or sometimes twice a month.
Those meetings are usually two and a half hours.
There's provost staff meeting every Tuesday morning from 8.30 until 11.30.
What are the normal topics there?
We hear reports on what's doing at the coordinating board, what's doing at the legislature.
The different associate provosts may have decisions coming up that they really want to kick around, and so we put things on the agenda and share them in group fashion.
And the provost staff, who is most directly related to the coordinating board?
Bill Perry and Jeanette Ferris.
Jeanette does the direct contact.
Did you go normally to coordinating board meetings?
No.
I went to a few when I was associate dean.
I don't think I've been to a one since I've been dean of faculty.
That used to be one of my, I always went to those.
Yeah, no.
All right, so other regular weekly meetings, weekly or monthly meetings,
My own staff meets regularly once a week.
I attend the Minority Conditions Subcommittee of the Faculty Senate, which meets monthly during the academic year.
Minority Conditions?
Subcommittee of the Faculty Senate.
What are their primary concerns?
Diversity on campus.
What does the word conditions mean?
Darn if I know how that name came about.
When I was associate dean, there was a committee with that name, and who named it, I don't know.
I just accept it.
Status of women committee I attend, which some years is active and some years is not, depending on who's chairing it.
Personnel and welfare committee of the Senate I meet with once a month, sometimes more often.
Not usually the executive committee of the Senate, although if they invite me, then I go to those to attend the full Senate meetings once a month.
Are there any, which faculty leaders would you give the highest marks to?
We've had a succession of strong speakers of the Faculty Senate, especially last year and this year.
Bob Strausser was the speaker last year.
Rick Carlson is the speaker this year.
And Rick Carlson's in Geosciences.
Geology, I believe.
And Rick worked very closely with last year's speaker, which I think is really how it should be, so that he was well informed.
We meet together always once a month and sometimes more often to talk about issues that are before the Senate.
I meet with the executive committee of the distinguished professors once a month.
That's usually a lunch meeting at the faculty club.
I have faculty members who drop by to see me, not usually without appointment, although I always tell when I go out to departments or whatever, it's an open door, you can drop by, but if you want to be sure of catching me, you might want an appointment.
Now, in your normal schedule, you were on the campus from 7?
I usually don't get here before 8 unless I have a scheduled breakfast meeting.
8 till about what?
Usually go home at 6.30.
6.30.
And of that time, you're physically in this office about?
Three-fourths of the time.
And looking at paperwork a lot of that time.
Yeah, increasingly email.
Okay, and I'm assuming that
Not much of those matters are strict budget matters.
They're personal matters.
No.
Personal matters are the main thing.
Problem cases, of course, consume a disproportionate amount of your time, effort, and certainly emotional energy.
We have a wonderful faculty here.
The happiest thing I do is to see people's achievement.
Those promotion cases, I mean, amazing people, wonderful things that they have done.
That's the happiest.
And most of our people are in that category.
But when something goes wrong, for whatever reason,
when somebody strays into a problem situation, when people stray into controversies.
That's very few, but they take huge time.
And they're emotionally draining.
Have you, during these years as dean of faculties, have you had any cases that went to court that you were involved in?
No.
And certainly I want to keep it that way.
To whom, to whom did you turn for advice?
Jo Newton who is now interim dean of science and I have said this in public at groups and so that's why I'm willing to say it to you.
Everybody has
people to whom they go for advice and counsel.
And Joe, I find to be thoughtful and wise and very humane in his motivation.
Larry Oliver, the Associate Dean of Liberal Arts, I have sometimes gone to for advice.
Pierce Cantrell and Mark Weichold and I
work together a lot and we we share around the phone calls and Do you on occasion call somebody and say let's just go to lunch or let's go have some coffee and relax and unload?
Not very often unless this time has gone by and I've kind of gotten caught up more and more in the Oh the image that comes to mind is of coils of rope kind of tying you in you know and
of the demands of the job, but of course once in a while, but not very often.
Julia Blackwelder, department head in history.
Julia and I go back quite a few years and will about once a semester have a lunch that's kind of just for fun and chatting.
What should be the primary task of the dean of faculties?
Ensuring fairness, ensuring that policies are adhered to and are applied equally.
To a slightly lesser degree, attempting to construct, to help construct policies that are fair.
I think the dean of faculties needs to be a voice for fairness.
the dean of faculties needs to attempt to represent the faculty voice to the administration to ensure that when decisions are made that should involve the faculty, that they do involve the faculty.
I'm nodding because when people ask me in my years what it was, I told them that I thought the task was to speak for the faculty to the administration and on occasion
for the administration to the faculty directly without going through all the others.
And certainly Dr. Williams certainly liked that idea.
Are there any other areas of responsibility that ought to be under the dean of faculties that are not?
Now that's a good question.
I don't know that that's true.
I can't think of any right now.
We have had some discussions about international services, whether it should be under the dean of faculties, because most of the international processing, and by that I mean the visa kinds of consideration, most of that pertains to faculty.
But it's also a very specialized expertise and wherever it's placed, there are going to be advantages and disadvantages.
On the whole, I think we're well served with leaving it where it is.
What about the experiment stations and extension services should?
No.
Should not be?
I don't think so.
Those are separate agencies.
I've had some concerns over are we always maintaining clarity of lines between who's university faculty and who is not because the tenure system applies to university faculty but it does not to the agencies.
Let's see, were you expected to attend regents meetings?
No.
I have a couple of times attended regents meetings because of things that were on the agenda that were of interest and I wanted to be there to hear the discussion, but I'm not expected to attend them, no.
Alumni form student event?
No, really not.
Let's see.
Mention lawsuits.
You review all promotion.
Right.
And tenure.
Terminations.
Oh, heavens yes.
And annual salary.
It's interesting.
I don't think the dean of faculties is as involved in annual salary matters as perhaps was true when you were in this position.
Partly it's a function of the numbers.
I mean, it's a huge faculty.
I can remember in the first years when I was associate dean, at budget time, we came over and presented our budget to the provost and at least
Well, I guess it was Danny Parker at that time who's still there.
And we went over name by name those salary recommendations.
That has not been done in years.
And now I don't even know what the salaries are being recommended unless they are above the guidelines, unless they are exceptional ones that require central approval, and then I do.
But I find out after the fact.
And from the standpoint of working proactively on salary equity questions, I find that a little bothersome.
I wish that we looked at it first.
We don't.
Let's see, you do look at review every new faculty appointment.
Yes.
And are some of those difficult to identify if they are part-time faculty and part-time something else?
Paperwork should make it pretty transparent.
If I don't know what it is, then something hasn't been filled out right.
Because I shouldn't have any trouble telling that.
Yeah.
And people have to be at least a third with the university to be eligible for tenure.
Okay.
And in terms of...